When I say “data,” what am I referring to exactly? The primary focus is on structured
data, a deliberately vague term that encompasses many different common forms of
data, such as:
1
• Tabular or spreadsheet-like data in which each column may be a different type•
(string, numeric, date, or otherwise). This includes most kinds of data commonly
stored in relational databases or tab- or comma-delimited text files.
• Multidimensional arrays (matrices).•
• Multiple tables of data interrelated by key columns (what would be primary or•
foreign keys for a SQL user).
• Evenly or unevenly spaced time series.•
This is by no means a complete list. Even though it may not always be obvious, a
large percentage of datasets can be transformed into a structured form that is more
suitable for analysis and modeling. If not, it may be possible to extract features from
a dataset into a structured form. As an example, a collection of news articles could
be processed into a word frequency table, which could then be used to perform
sentiment analysis.


For many people, the Python programming language has strong appeal. Since its
first appearance in 1991, Python has become one of the most popular interpreted
programming languages, along with Perl, Ruby, and others. Python and Ruby have
become especially popular since 2005 or so for building websites using their numer‐
ous web frameworks, like Rails (Ruby) and Django (Python). Such languages are
often called scripting languages, as they can be used to quickly write small programs,
or scripts to automate other tasks. I don’t like the term “scripting languages,” as it
carries a connotation that they cannot be used for building serious software. Among
interpreted languages, for various historical and cultural reasons, Python has devel‐
oped a large and active scientific computing and data analysis community. In the last
20 years, Python has gone from a bleeding-edge or “at your own risk” scientific com‐
puting language to one of the most important languages for data science, machine
learning, and general software development in academia and industry.

I believe that
more and more companies will go down this path, as there are often significant
organizational benefits to having both researchers and software engineers using the
same set of programming tools.

Over the last decade some new approaches to solving the “two-language” problem
have appeared, such as the Julia programming language. Getting the most out of
Python in many cases will require programming in a low-level language like C or
C++ and creating Python bindings to that code. That said, “just-in-time” (JIT) com‐
piler technology provided by libraries like Numba have provided a way to achieve
excellent performance in many computational algorithms without having to leave the
Python programming environment.

Why Not Python?
While Python is an excellent environment for building many kinds of analytical
applications and general-purpose systems, there are a number of uses for which
Python may be less suitable.
As Python is an interpreted programming language, in general most Python code
will run substantially slower than code written in a compiled language like Java or
C++. As programmer time is often more valuable than CPU time, many are happy to
make this trade-off. However, in an application with very low latency or demanding
1.2 Why Python for Data Analysis? | 3
resource utilization requirements (e.g., a high-frequency trading system), the time
spent programming in a lower-level (but also lower-productivity) language like C++
to achieve the maximum possible performance might be time well spent.
Python can be a challenging language for building highly concurrent, multithreaded
applications, particularly applications with many CPU-bound threads. The reason for
this is that it has what is known as the global interpreter lock (GIL), a mechanism that
prevents the interpreter from executing more than one Python instruction at a time.
The technical reasons for why the GIL exists are beyond the scope of this book. While
it is true that in many big data processing applications, a cluster of computers may be
required to process a dataset in a reasonable amount of time, there are still situations
where a single-process, multithreaded system is desirable.
This is not to say that Python cannot execute truly multithreaded, parallel code.
Python C extensions that use native multithreading (in C or C++) can run code in
parallel without being impacted by the GIL, as long as they do not need to regularly
interact with Python objects.